



Network Working Group                                          F. Linker
Internet-Draft                                                  D. Basin
Intended status: Informational                                ETH Zurich
Expires: 22 November 2024                                     M. Vignati
                                                                    ICRC
                                                             21 May 2024


                 Problem Statement for a Digital Emblem
                   draft-linker-digital-emblem-latest

Abstract

   In times of armed conflict, the protective emblems of the red cross,
   red crescent, and red crystal are used to mark _physical_ assets.
   This enables military units to identify assets as respected and
   protected under international humanitarian law.  This draft explores
   how one could apply the protective emblems to _digital_, network-
   connected infrastructure using a _digital emblem_, and defines the
   requirements of a digital emblem, emphasizing security requirements.

   Notably, a digital emblem has a unique combination of security
   requirements, namely, authentication, accountability, and a property
   that we call _covert inspection_. Covert inspection means that those
   wishing to authenticate assets as protected must be able to do so
   without revealing that they may attack unprotected entities.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 22 November 2024.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2024 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  The Problem
     3.1.  Legal and Historical Background
     3.2.  Problem Domain
     3.3.  Requirements
       3.3.1.  Covert Inspection
       3.3.2.  Authentic
       3.3.3.  Decentralized Trust Model
       3.3.4.  Accountable Display
       3.3.5.  Removable & Verifiable Presence
     3.4.  Use-Case Scenarios
       3.4.1.  Personal Devices
       3.4.2.  Constrained Devices
       3.4.3.  Servers
       3.4.4.  Networks
     3.5.  Excluded Scenarios
   4.  Proposed Designs for a Digital Emblem
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  IANA Considerations
   7.  References
     7.1.  Normative References
     7.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   International Humanitarian Law (IHL) mandates that military units
   must not attack medical facilities, such as hospitals.  The emblems
   of the red cross, red crescent, and red crystal are used to mark
   _physical_ infrastructure (e.g., by a red cross painted on a
   hospital's rooftop), thereby enabling military units to identify
   those assets as protected under IHL.  The International Committee of
   the Red Cross (ICRC) recently posed the question: How can one extend
   such markings to _digital_ infrastructure such as servers and
   networks?  [DE-REPORT]

   The goal of a digital emblem is to prevent cyberattacks on
   humanitarian infrastructure.  Parties to armed conflicts are bound by
   IHL, and are thus required by law to respect the protective emblems.
   Other actors may not be bound by IHL, but could still respect a
   digital emblem.  Either out of respect for the humanitarian cause or
   to avoid unwanted attention when attacking marked assets.  A digital
   emblem can only serve this purpose, though, if it meets a unique
   combination of requirements.

   1.  Digital emblems require authentication as assets must not be able
       to fake protection, for example, by transferring emblems from
       medical to military infrastructures.

   2.  Protective emblems must be decentralized, i.e., there must be no
       central authorities that govern the use or distribution of
       digital emblems.  Under IHL, states themselves determine which
       parties and assets may display the emblem under their authority.

   3.  Systems with a decentralized trust model are prone to misuse.
       Therefore, a digital emblem must be designed so that parties can
       be held accountable whenever they mark unprotected
       infrastructure.  Protection under IHL stems from law, and laws
       must be enforceable to have an effect.

   4.  Those wishing to authenticate assets must be able to verify
       protective emblems in a way that does not call attention to the
       fact that they are screening potential targets.  We call this
       property _covert inspection_. This is analogous to looking at a
       physical emblem from a distance: A flag of a red cross does
       similarly not raise attention to the fact that its being looked
       at.

   Work on the digital emblem dates back multiple years.  In 2020, the
   ICRC invited two research institutions, Johns Hopkins University
   Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) and the Centre for Cyber Trust
   (CECYT), a joint research centre between ETH Zurich and Bonn
   University, to develop technical proposals for a digital emblem.
   These proposals were presented to and evaluated by a group of
   international experts at the invitation of the ICRC [DE-REPORT].  We
   discuss the proposed designs in Section 4.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  The Problem

3.1.  Legal and Historical Background

   The Geneva Conventions and their _Additional Protocols_ (APs)
   constitute the core of IHL and establish legal rules on the conduct
   of armed conflict.  These Conventions and Protocol establish the
   meaning and usage of protective emblems, namely, the red cross,
   crescent, and crystal.

   The emblems have a protective and an indicative function.  In its
   protective function, parties to conflict may apply an emblem to
   assets that exclusively undertake medical functions, such as
   vehicles, personnel, or buildings.  These emblems inform other
   parties that they must not be attacked.  In its indicative function,
   an emblem signals affiliation with the International Red Cross and
   Red Crescent Movement.

   Since 1949, the Geneva Conventions have been revised.  AP I contains
   additional regulations on how parties to conflict can communicate
   their status using technical means, like radar transponders and radio
   signals.  Recognizing that technology may progress rapidly, the
   amendment process for AP I is streamlined.  For example, this process
   could begin through expert consultations convened by the ICRC.

3.2.  Problem Domain

   The concept of a digital emblem touches a variety of stakeholders.
   First and foremost, there are _emblem issuers (EIs)_, groups that
   provide medical services or conduct humanitarian operations such as
   military forces or organizations like Doctors Without Borders.  As
   part of their activities, they may display the protective emblems on
   their _protected digital assets_, such as mobile devices (tablets,
   smartphones), servers (both virtual and dedicated), or an intranet.
   Prior to commencing their operations, EIs must seek permission from
   competent _authorities_. When they are given permission, EIs can
   apply digital emblems to their protected assets, which _present_ them
   to three types of _agents_.

   _Regular users_ of an asset do not pay attention to the emblem, for
   example, when they visit a website. _Verifiers_ pay attention to the
   emblem and only wish to attack lawful (under IHL) targets.  They are
   typically part of an armed force engaged in a conflict.  We can
   assume that most verifiers (typically military units) will be
   associated with an authority (typically their nation state or an
   ally), and, hence, that such verifiers can obtain the authentic
   public keys of their affiliated authorities through secure, out-of-
   band channels.  Finally, we define _adversaries_ as those agents that
   are willing to violate IHL and search to abuse digital emblems.  For
   example, they may seek to issue emblems to non-protected assets.

3.3.  Requirements

   The digital emblem's requirements were adapted from the ICRC's report
   on digital emblems [DE-REPORT].  However, whereas the report
   introduces requirements on a much higher, abstract level and without
   a detailed consideration of security, we present a comprehensive list
   of actionable, technical requirements.

   The purpose of a digital emblem is to prevent attacks on protected
   assets by informing other parties about their status under IHL.
   (Note that IHL also permits the indicative use of an emblem, we
   subsume this case under the protective use of an emblem for clarity.)
   The digital emblem's requirements are derived from two important
   insights. (i) A digital emblem critically requires adoption by
   verifiers, which (by definition) intend to attack assets not
   protected under IHL. (ii) A digital emblem should comply with
   existing IHL, which facilitates the diplomatic process of adopting a
   digital emblem.

3.3.1.  Covert Inspection

   A digital emblem MUST NOT reveal who is inspecting it.  We call this
   requirement _covert inspection_. If verifiers were to reveal that
   they are inspecting digital emblems, their targets (potentially
   unprotected) could use that knowledge to protect themselves against
   an imminent attack, and verifiers would therefore not inspect
   emblems.  In particular, covert inspection implies that emblem
   presentation must be _active_, i.e., verifiers will be sent emblems
   and need not query them explicitly.

3.3.2.  Authentic

   Digital emblems MUST be _authentic_, i.e., a digital emblem only
   marks assets that are used to provide medical services or conduct
   humanitarian operations.  If it were not authentic, verifiers would
   risk that their lawful, i.e., unprotected, targets could avert
   attacks by displaying fraudulent emblems, and verifiers would again
   not inspect emblems.

3.3.3.  Decentralized Trust Model

   Compliance with existing IHL implies that there MUST NOT be a fixed
   set of authorities that can regulate how a digital emblem is used,
   i.e., it must follow a _decentralized trust model_.

3.3.4.  Accountable Display

   Systems with a decentralized trust model can suffer from misuse.
   Should a digital emblem be codified in law, it is crucial that any
   unlawful display of digital emblems can be provably attributed to the
   respective parties such that they can be prosecuted.  Hence, a
   digital emblem MUST provide _accountability_.

3.3.5.  Removable & Verifiable Presence

   A digital emblem should work just as the physical emblems.  Just as a
   flag with a red cross can be displayed and removed at any time, a
   digital emblem MUST be applicable to the widest possible range of use
   cases and digital technologies, and also be easily _removable_.
   Additionally, agents MUST be able to _verify the presence_ of digital
   emblems.  With physical emblems, unprotected assets will simply not
   show the red cross.  Likewise, in the digital domain, these assets
   will not present an invalid emblem, but rather no emblem, and
   verifiers must be able to determine when no emblem was shown to them.

3.4.  Use-Case Scenarios

   In the following, we list a number of use cases that a digital emblem
   should cover.  These use cases were derived in collaboration with the
   ICRC and a broad range of international experts, including the
   medical sector, the information technology sector, the military
   sector, and cybersecurity experts.

   It may turn out that there cannot be a single design proposal that
   covers all use-cases.  Nevertheless, the number of ways in which a
   digital emblem can be distributed should be kept minimal.  The more
   interfaces supported by a digital emblem, the greater the burden on
   verifiers, who would need to check every interface to ensure that
   they are not attacking a protected asset.

3.4.1.  Personal Devices

   A digital emblem should apply to general purpose, personal computing
   devices such as laptops, smartphones, and tablets.  Typically, such
   devices have no stable IP address, but have a powerful operating
   system and support complex applications well.

3.4.2.  Constrained Devices

   A digital emblem should apply to network-connected devices that are
   constrained in computing power, bandwidth, or cannot be easily
   modified, for example, medical or IoT devices.  Typically, such
   devices are deployed in a fixed environment, however, due to power,
   hardware, or legal constraints, they cannot support complex
   applications, or their software might not be modifiable at all.

3.4.3.  Servers

   A digital emblem should apply to dedicated and virtual servers, e.g.,
   web or database servers.  Such servers may or may not have a stable
   IP or a domain name associated with them.

3.4.4.  Networks

   A digital emblem should apply to networks that are controlled by one
   organization, e.g., the ICRC's internal network.  Typically, such
   networks have an IP range associated with them.  Each device
   connected to this network should fall into one of the categories
   above and could thus be marked individually.  However, marking entire
   networks should drastically ease the burden of deployment,
   verification, and distribution.

3.5.  Excluded Scenarios

   Notably, a digital emblem cannot be applied to infrastructure that is
   used for both services worthy and unworthy of protection.  A digital
   emblem must always identify assets that only serve purposes that
   enjoy protection under IHL.

4.  Proposed Designs for a Digital Emblem

   Two designs were proposed to solve the problem of a digital emblem.
   First, JHU APL proposed a DNS-based solution for a digital emblem
   [I-D.haberman-digital-emblem].  Second, CECYT (a joint endeavour
   between ETH Zurich and Bonn University) proposed _An Authentic
   Digital EMblem (ADEM)_, which was initially described in an academic
   publication [ADEM], but was also specified technically [ADEM-SPEC]
   and has openly accessible, working prototypes (Go library and CLI
   (https://github.com/adem-wg/adem-proto), Browser extension
   (https://github.com/adem-wg/adem-chrome)).  We focus here on ADEM as
   it was selected by the ICRC as the most suitable proposal for a
   digital emblem.

   ADEM was designed following the requirements laid out in this draft.
   ADEM follows a decentralized trust model and utilizes existing
   infrastructure wherever possible, e.g., it provides accountability
   through the Certificate Transparency infrastructure [RFC6962].  ADEM
   was designed to be distributed over many channels and as such is not
   bound to one mode of transportation.  The academic paper foresees
   distribution of digital emblems via TLS, DNS, and UDP.  Next to its
   prototype, ADEM's security was thoroughly evaluated and formal proofs
   of security are described in the academic publication.

   Once there is consensus on the scope of a digital emblem, the plan is
   to propose ADEM as a basis for designing a digital emblem.  Although
   ADEM was evaluated on many occasions, it is subject to change.  In
   particular, it must be investigated whether it fits the needs of all
   stakeholders of a digital emblem.

5.  Security Considerations

   The requirements "covert inspection", "authentic", and "accountable
   display" are all security requirements, i.e., one must consider
   powerful adversaries trying to break these requirements when
   evaluating a proposal for a digital emblem.  The original, academic
   paper proposing _ADEM: An Authentic Digital Emblem_ formally verified
   ADEM's security, and any subsequent proposal should be rigorously
   analyzed as well.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

7.2.  Informative References

   [ADEM]     Linker, F. and D. Basin, "ADEM: An Authentic Digital
              EMblem", CCS '23 Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIGSAC
              Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
              November 2023,
              <https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3576915.3616578>.

   [ADEM-SPEC]
              Linker, F., Jackson, D., and D. Basin, "An Authenticated
              Digital EMblem - Core Specification", August 2023,
              <https://adem-wg.github.io/adem-spec/draft-adem-wg-adem-
              core.html>.

   [DE-REPORT]
              Rodenhäuser, T., Vignati, M., Maybee, L., and H. Johnston,
              "Digitalizing the Red Cross, Red Crescent and Red Crystal
              Emblems", November 2022,
              <https://www.icrc.org/en/document/icrc-digital-emblems-
              report>.

   [I-D.haberman-digital-emblem]
              Haberman, B., Mankin, A., Woodcock, B., Deccio, C., and A.
              DeSimone, "Digital Emblems Indicating Protections Under
              International Law", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-haberman-digital-emblem-00, 29 March 2024,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-haberman-
              digital-emblem-00>.

   [RFC6962]  Laurie, B., Langley, A., and E. Kasper, "Certificate
              Transparency", RFC 6962, DOI 10.17487/RFC6962, June 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6962>.

Acknowledgments

   Parts of this draft are based on the initial academic publication
   describing the proposal _ADEM: An Authentic Digital EMblem_ [ADEM].
   Initial work on this project was funded by the Werner Siemens-
   Stiftung (WSS).  We thank the WSS for their generous support.

Authors' Addresses

   Felix Linker
   ETH Zurich
   Email: flinker@inf.ethz.ch


   David Basin
   ETH Zurich
   Email: flinker@inf.ethz.ch


   Mauro Vignati
   ICRC
   Email: mvignati@icrc.org
